---
title: "A Definition of a Gentleman"
author: "John Henry Cardinal Newman"
---

[I]t is almost a definition of a gentleman to say he is one who never
inflicts pain. This description is both refined and, as far as it
goes, accurate. He is mainly occupied in merely removing the obstacles
which hinder the free and unembarrassed action of those about him, and
he concurs with their movements rather than takes the initiative
himself.

His benefits may be considered as parallel to what are called comforts
or conveniences in arrangements of a personal nature: like an easy
chair or a good fire, which do their part in dispelling cold and
fatigue, though nature provides both means of rest and animal heat
without them.

The true gentleman in like manner carefully avoids whatever may cause
a jar or a jolt in the minds of those with whom he is cast;--all
clashing of opinion, or collision of feeling, all restraint, or
suspicion, or gloom, or resentment; his great concern being to make
everyone at their ease and at home.

He has his eyes on all his company; he is tender towards the bashful,
gentle towards the distant, and merciful towards the absurd; he can
recollect to whom he is speaking; he guards against unseasonable
allusions, or topics which may irritate; he is seldom prominent in
conversation, and never wearisome.

He makes light of favours while he does them, and seems to be
receiving when he is conferring. He never speaks of himself except
when compelled, never defends himself by a mere retort, he has no ears
for slander or gossip, is scrupulous in imputing motives to those who
interfere with him, and interprets everything for the best.

He is never mean or little in his disputes, never takes unfair
advantage, never mistakes personalities or sharp sayings for
arguments, or insinuates evil which he dare not say out. From a
long-sighted prudence, he observes the maxim of the ancient sage, that
we should ever conduct ourselves towards our enemy as if he were one
day to be our friend.

He has too much good sense to be affronted at insults, he is too well
employed to remember injuries, and too indolent to bear malice. He is
patient, forbearing, and resigned, on philosophical principles; he
submits to pain, because it is inevitable, to bereavement, because it
is irreparable, and to death, because it is his destiny.

If he engages in controversy of any kind, his disciplined intellect
preserves him from the blundering discourtesy of better, perhaps, but
less educated minds; who, like blunt weapons, tear and hack instead of
cutting clean, who mistake the point in argument, waste their strength
on trifles, misconceive their adversary, and leave the question more
involved than they find it.

He may be right or wrong in his opinion, but he is too clear-headed to
be unjust; he is as simple as he is forcible, and as brief as he is
decisive. Nowhere shall we find greater candour, consideration,
indulgence: he throws himself into the minds of his opponents, he
accounts for their mistakes.

He knows the weakness of human reason as well as its strength, its province and its limits. If he be an unbeliever, he will be too profound and large-minded to ridicule religion or to act against it; he is too wise to be a dogmatist or fanatic in his infidelity.
He respects piety and devotion; he even supports institutions as
venerable, beautiful, or useful, to which he does not assent; he
honours the ministers of religion, and it contents him to decline its
mysteries without assailing or denouncing them.

He is a friend of religious toleration, and that, not only because his
philosophy has taught him to look on all forms of faith with an
impartial eye, but also from the gentleness and effeminacy of feeling,
which is the attendant on civilization.

Not that he may not hold a religion too, in his own way, even when he
is not a Christian. In that case, his religion is one of imagination
and sentiment; it is the embodiment of those ideas of the sublime,
majestic, and beautiful, without which there can be no large
philosophy.

Sometimes he acknowledges the being of God, sometimes he invests an
unknown principle or quality with the attributes of perfection. And
this deduction of his reason, or creation of his fancy, he makes the
occasion of such excellent thoughts, and the starting-point of so
varied and systematic a teaching, that he even seems like a disciple
of Christianity itself.

From the very accuracy and steadiness of his logical powers, he is
able to see what sentiments are consistent in those who hold any
religious doctrine at all, and he appears to others to feel and to
hold a whole circle of theological truths, which exist in his mind no
otherwise than as a number of deductions.

